And a very warm welcome to everybody from a really barmy evening here in southwest France
to a very interesting talk by Trevor Griffiths, who's got an extremely interesting background
as you'll see because he he studied medicine neuroscience and immunology and then was in
medicine for a long time and he then developed this emotional literacy and emotional logic
and so he's become a coach full-time and and we're going to find out more about that
this this evening and you'll see that he's using some of the David Bohm terminology
implicate order whole hollow movement at the end of human heart and I'm really looking forward
to finding out what that means and also his key question do brains filter out our connection
into life I think that's a very very interesting question as well and coming from a sort of
neuro psychological point of view and while you're on I will put a link to a spectator article
on consciousness by Kit Wilson this week which is extremely interesting because it finishes up
questioning materialism which is almost unheard of in a kind of mainstream publication so maybe
we're making some progress after all so Trevor it's a great pleasure to have you with us this
evening and we're looking forward to what you have to share with us thank you very much
yes thank you very much for the for the welcome for the invitation it's great to
spend a bit of time with you to be sharing a range of thoughts that have developed have I
frozen by the way or not no just on mine it seems to have done anyway so I've got a power
point to share I'll take you through so if I can share screens on this now
and how does that look is that coming through for everybody
yeah that's good so thank you so the theme between the seconds of your mind and this is
as you mentioned thanks David the base and David Bowen's concept of the intricate order
behind the explicate order that we we live amongst where he is describing it all being
hollow movement that there's movement and this talk as you see from the title is about how we
perhaps connect into that through our inner hearts
so I'm my main focus in this talk is around the human mind we sit in the middle of two enormous
scales the telescopic of the universe and the microscopic scale and these both meet in the way
our minds work and one of the things that really struck me as I looked at both of these these
scales of interest as a scientist is how everything rotates or vibrates everything's in movement
and as I through my studies got more involved in the way the brain works I came to realize that
there is a particular feature of the way our brains help us get organized in space and in
time and in the sense of substance that we're part of that actually screens out
some of the awareness of our relatedness in life and converts it into static objects
and that's going to be the main theme of this talk is what is going on that our brains construct
certain ideas that where everything is moving everything's in turmoil
somehow we've developed through our brains the idea that there is static matter
now I went to Oxford to study medicine I was a bit of an unusual student in that I didn't have
the traditional push by to get around I had a motorbike and quite enjoyed sort of
driving it around a bit a bit faster times and so on but I had a wide range of interests there
not just medicine but immunology macromolecular studies of the cell membranes and so on
but also I was what I call a seeker after truth I had a number of religious experiences
things that didn't quite make sense I had explored churches but couldn't quite get on with
traditional religion that explored through Zen of course originally starting with that
iconic book Zen in the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance of course taking a little bit from there
and into eaching and the idea of divination and but then realizing why not do we need sticks or
stones to engage with this world through divination if actually our inner hearts are
connected in there as well if we are connected in there as well so I moved on from that into
more an intuitive sort of prayerful search but without any formal structure to that
and in the midst of this search I was also writing a poetry you know as students do
and one day in this frame out came this particular poem which I'd like to read to you and tell you
a bit of a story behind this Angle's Turn and Lines Forgive Chris Crossing of the Mind
for here in the world there is beauty such as always found between the seconds of your mind
so that poem came out when I was there I wrote it down and I suddenly got this feeling
that I needed to get on my motorbike and drive and then I was going to have to give that poem to
somebody so just intuitively I just did that I put it's a bit cool at the time so I put a
jumper on a jacket and put the poem on the inside pocket and then put my outer jacket on to go on
the bike and set off and drove out from the center of Oxford got out to a semi-industrial area on
the edge and then suddenly thought that's it I've arrived so I pulled off the road got off the bike
and I was expecting somebody to come by and that I'd know they ought to give this poem to them
and nobody came so I started exploring around reached inside couldn't find the poem
search everywhere went back to the flat couldn't find the poem anywhere it had disappeared
and because of the sort of experiences that I've been having I was just going to say right well
that's a mystery you know of course I could have just dropped it somewhere of course but actually
it was very securely wrapped up under two secure levels of clothing on the way out and I just was
willing to hold that I think as you see as we go along this poem actually becomes quite relevant
so that was what I would call a sigh event but then something more significant happened
while there I had a dream one night and it was a dream that foretold the future so accurately
that it saved my life I dreamt I saw my death on the motorbike I won't go to the details of the
dream but there were two sages to it one of which alerted me to the next scene in which I was knocked
off sideways and and so I started driving a bit more sensibly and carefully but it was a month or
so went by and nothing happened and of course I went back my old ways which were you know a little
bit getting out around the cars and enjoy what you're doing and so on but a situation arose then
where something really strange started to happen and I thought this is it and at that moment I was
about to do something I'll come back and tell a bit more about this later I chose to do the exact
opposite of my natural thing which would have been to accelerate and overtake three cars at the same
time and instead I jammed on the brakes pulled back behind the last car and something remarkable
happened the car at the front the first one did a most unusual maneuver spun 180 degrees in the
middle of the road and zoomed off in the opposite direction and it undoubtedly would have knocked
me off and killed me so I was alerted to a situation by that dream and as far as I'm concerned
because I you know I am sort of a scientist in my way of approaching things that was a dream that
broke the traditional scientific laws of time the science is based in the view of the arrow of time
from past to the future causal effects causal chains and this was something that broke that
causal chain so to be honest every day that I live I'm this this event is still as fresh in my mind
as ever I'm alive because of an event that broke these the rules of space and time and that set
me off on a search saying science is definitely delving into something but it's not the whole
story there's a lot more that we need to explore so I I was a part of neuroscience studies studying
the cats sort of visual cortex and taking part in experiments with you know single nerve
microelectrope recordings and so on so I'm quite used to the idea of the brain working with patterns
of activity but the problem was that I felt sorry for the cat I'm not I just said I wasn't
really a lab researcher and eventually left a PhD and go back into medical studies again
because I wanted to be a researcher in life and I was keen on immunology and the immune
diseases and so on and realized that both neuroscience and immunology they're both
pattern recognizing systems that we as an organism are detecting patterns with distant
senses in the neuroscience and the immunologies with chemical patterns with recognizing what's
self and what's other and that is all part of our identity as a person it's at a physical level
and at a social and wider environmental level but in all of that that I was studying I knew
something was missing from science and it was to do with relatedness to do with relationship
I was looking at communication patterns between cell populations and health and disease
but decided to leave in the end to go into medicine but I had I took a particular interest
in family medicine and systemic work because the patterns of communication amongst people
I found were reflected in the patterns that the brain was detecting in the environment and
understanding how the immune system worked on pattern recognition and responsiveness
the same thing was going on in families and in communities neighborhoods workplaces
so I was forming this idea of identical principles of organization principles of
organization that's a core thing that I'm going to be talking with you about because
it's about this area that I believe I'll be able to give an explanation of these two side events
that broke the rules of space and time getting into the level of communication patterns and
relational patterns now I also put the picture here of shredding his cat and what I just like
to say is that this thought experiment about the quantum level of life I believe is completely
fallacious the reason is that it's not the cat or any of the things here it's in a box
and the thought experiment relies on that box being screened off until somebody opens the
lid and looks at it and then that is the input of energy into this closed system that determines
what happens the problem is that science has recently shown that the universe is not a closed
system which is the picture that what I call enlightenment science for the last 300 years
has all been based on the idea that the universe is a closed system bounded by space and time
and the matter moves with momentum and bounces around inside this box
and so on but in 2011 three physicists and primitive Schmidt and Rice got the Nobel prize
for physics for proving that the universe is not only still expanding but the rate of expansion
is accelerating right so we are part of a universe that is expanding at an ever increasing rate
but that means the universe of which we belong is an open system it has to be an open system
and I'm sorry to disappoint people but all the rules of thermodynamics to do with entropy and
energy preservation and so on are all framed within the concepts of closed systems they do
apply in closed systems but at a universal scale in which we human beings are embedded
it's an open system and those rules may not apply and that's what I'm going to be saying to
they actually do not apply at the level of the human heart Karen Barad of course has done a lot of
work on the concept of intraaction we human beings are interactive in this universal scale
also in local systems and it's up to us by our choice of action whether we create closed systems
and believe in them or whether we live as if we are part of an open system
so I came up with this thing there's a lot of neuroscientists are keen on the idea that the
brain is actually a social brain it isn't there just to give us a sense of who we are and for us
to generate feelings internally it's not an individualistic thing the brain is there to map
our relatedness and to map our relationships and I found from my developing interest in
Christian in Celtic Christianity because it's very earth it's very rooted in the community in the
community in hospitality in the rhythms of nature to me that this is where the life of things are
generated and the Celts had already had this image called a triquetra three corners a state that is
three points but not a triangle or triquetra three corners and it's an icon of never-ending
movement of continuous dynamic if you follow the lines along you know it just goes round and round
and when you fit two together you just the relatedness goes backwards and forwards between them
and this is eternal movement and this is how I'm going to be displaying what I believe
is David Bohm's concept of hollow movement now these two icons of movement the triquetra
are icons that can be scaled to lots of different levels it's a prince the principles of organization
of movement movement is the changing relatedness of forms changing relatedness of forms
so this could represent two adults talking together a conversation it could be in Celtic
Christianity god and humanity in a conversation it could be a mother and child but also I'm going
to be putting to you that this could be an icon that represents quantal change this could be the
gardener in the earth that you know you can have a relationship with your garden to cultivate and
bring forth fruitfulness from the land and the idea of having two of the self-organizing
elements that meet together into a conversational relationship is that one becomes an ecology
for the other this is an ecological picture of the human being an ecological picture in which
the environment scale from the quantal to the universal and to the social and the inner world
and in this I'm going to introduce the word information and the core thing in this is because
I'm proposing that everything is in movement information is a verb it's not a noun it is
the forming and following this along the change that's going on in this in this person here
is transferred relatedness over to here to it transforms the other person and this is
information it's a dynamic it's not a noun and this is and what I'm proposing is that
this type of iconic relationship or relatedness is synergy this is a vibration one movement
happening here induces movement here and that workflows back and here we have synergic movement
backwards and forwards this is an image an icon of relatedness
so there's mutual repatterning which is synergy now this is actually the core slide the talk and
I'm going to come back to this slide right at the end of it just to to pull it all together at the end
and now in that a mutuality of repatterning there is bi-directional informational flow
and a lot of science is based in a linear concept of energy transfer or information transfer from a
transmitter to a receiver we're coming back to that a little bit later
but in systemic family therapy the the network of relationships and the communications that go
back and forth a group of people form a state of action going on within the family and that state
can either bring on helpful behavior or it can become chaotic or turbulent that's where the
social brain is connecting with it and the core principles of organization I believe are shaping
what goes on in the brain to engage with this conversational reality and that is what's called
the explicate order this is the the level we live in in our social setting setting environments
and that picture on the right of the lady looking at that artwork on a piece of on a UK postbox it
just shows the explicate order can get into a bit of a knot and get all tied up when when things get
a bit stressed but underneath that David Bowman is saying that there is an implicate order of
wholeness a hollow movement and I believe that the inner human heart connects into that at an
informational level where one is transforming the other through this synergistic connection
and that this synergistic connection lies behind what we describe as energy matter in the explicate
order right so movement emerges from the implicate order out into an explicate order where our
brains organize it into a concept so when I was studying neuroscience this is absolutely basic
neuroscience you know well established that there are what are called sensory association
areas in the brain where particularly the distance senses are all brought together to to to construct
certain impressions I'm not going to go into this in any detail at the moment but I just want to say
that it is well known that this parietal cortex area here generates a concept of space
and if there are lesions or illnesses that affect this area it'll be affecting our spatial awareness
this area of the frontal lobe underneath and in the middle is involved in sensing time
and this is the one that I really want to draw your attention to this temporal lobe sensory
association area living together you know your visual balance auditory touch sensations body
or a body images on all integrate here they pull together memories as well and so we get meaningful
association with our ongoing sensory experience is generated in these three different areas
now the point about the temporal lobe one is this is where there are some
unusual effects that come from epilepsy affecting this area or any other illnesses
and they can make life seem unreal what is what's going on here is something called
object recognition which is easiest described by for example talking about a bicycle the bicycle
looked at from different angles looks totally different and yet we somehow develop an idea
that this is a bicycle there's something solid there called a bike and it looks like this from
different angles right and that is what's being pulled together in this area of the brain
so it gives a sense of real present object recognition now when I started to apply the
triquetral image of what's happening here these change and form and relatedness are features of
our sensory input which are coming into this dynamic where the brain is constructing an organized
sense of the world out of chaotic neural experience of sensors coming in from all angles
and memories coming in together and it's happening here and these three areas these three points
coordinate by pairing their inputs in these different areas so if we if we were just to
look a little bit more at forms you know shapes of things and the relationship of forms if those
two things come together it creates a sense of space and if forms are changing a pendulum
swinging gives you a sense that there is time on the move and this is the one that I want to
draw your attention if this theory is true and this is a hypothesis I'm putting it to you as a
hypothesis that could be tested then if these three sensory inputs can be integrated in these
sensory association areas to generate a sense of space and of time and of real presence then the
other pairing is that the change of relatedness and what I mean by that is let's imagine you're
walking along suddenly you bang your hand against the edge of the table you haven't particularly
noticed right you will think there's a solid table there right but actually what's happened is that
your hand has had a change of relatedness and that that had got converted through your object
recognition temple sensory association area into the center there's a solid optic there
if you if somebody walks into a room if there's a change of relatedness you might get the sense
that there's a real presence of someone in the room so out of changes of relatedness we develop
a concept of substance there's a substantial person come in if someone says feel the quality
of this cloth you don't just put a fingertip against it and say you're feeling the quality
you move your hand over it and you get a pat changing array of sensory input that
you associate with your memories and gives you a sense of the substance of this material
that you're touching so this is object recognition any sense of objects that we have around us is
actually constructed from a whole history memorized of our changing relatedness with
our environment from the time when we were babies gumming things that we put in our mouths
right the way through we're accumulating a sense of textures and qualities that we
change our relatedness with and we shape this idea that things are real objects so this is a
fairly complicated idea but I just want to put it to you as a theory I'm put this icon up here
the core icon just to emphasize that this process going on in the brain is part of the social brain
all of these three are inputs from our environment that the brain is organizing
in order to make a response and these three are project forward to the motor areas here
that's what's going on in this central space and it's in the motor areas where we prepare our
responses that these three sense of spacetime and objects of substance and become properly
integrated into a sense of me myself in this environment so I spent a bit of time explaining
that but you know this is a core to it so this is just sort of restating what I said David
Bohm's implicate order of movement is the changing relatedness of patterned forms the changing
relatedness of patterned forms and that sense of space and time and of substantial reality
around us is what we mean by the explicate order that is it we have what I call an orientation
horizon a lot of our experience are placed in this sense of orientation in space and time and
substance but if you think about it there's an awful lot of our experience which is below
the orientation horizon which is not orientated and the simplest most obvious one to say is the
sense of smell that activates you that alerts you but it actually alerts you to search with your
distant senses for what the source of that smell is yeah so the sense of smell is not actually
orientated right but it it drives us to seek orientation to bring in this explicate order
to a set of experiences that are below that orientation horizon and this is what I'd like
to be proposing to you that this is what I mean by the inner human heart it's a whole range of
awareness and sensitivities that is below the orientation horizon and a lot of it is to do
with emotion with emotion a lot of it the emotion comes from our values and how we interact with
the world around our values emotion is energy in motion and emotion is values in from energy
entering our awareness this is where I'm proposing to you that our inner human hearts
are actually connected into an implicate order way beyond what we are aware of in our
conscious minds as being above the orientation horizon as an explicate order
now these informational movements that are shown in the double tri-creature can scale up
and I'm not going to spend too long on this but when they connect together what was the
synergic vibration just between two of them can start to become a progressive wave of movement
through networks of movement changes remember all of these tri-creature are not solid objects
they are icons of movement the changing relatedness of patterned forms and here we're beginning to see
patterned forms whoops you know that was um good on but um so the I'll just take um take that back
oh sorry and here we go this is going to be a bit unusual now anyway so just sorry about the
interaction there but the point I wanted to make from that previous slide is that um the
synergic movement can translate into progressive movements through that implicate order which
we'll come back to in a moment but this is what science measures science is measuring the movements
through the linear movements through what I'm going to be describing is what I believe is the
implicate order and describing it in terms of these networks of tri-creature tri-creature movement
now this this lovely sculpture here is just um a beautiful picture um of the types of conversational
orientation uh that I'd like to sort of capture for you um the the the iconic representations
can be true in networks of people or at the level in the implicate order even of quantum
gravity it's the same principles of movement that are on the go now in quantum theory there's
something called um you know quantum field quantum field theory which is running to problems because
it's based on particles and it says that around particles there's a quantum field of energetic
activity and it's it's running to one or two problems and I want to mention at this stage
because what I'm proposing about tri-creature um implicate order is that it's actually much more
pervasive than related to the particles the particles emerge out of it and I'm also going
to be proposing that waves in fact emerge out of this implicate order so the idea of quantum fields
around particles is approaching it in the wrong direction now I believe that looking at this level
of uh an extensive implicate order out of which emerge particles and waves and eventually emerge
all of the dynamics that we call explicit order which our brains have evolved to detect to engage
with to construct an impression of this world so that we can talk to each other sensibly and cooperate
to to to manage life and manage our environments together and all of that going on over incredibly
long time frames and so on but I believe that this implicate order relatedness can provide a
cosmological explanation for the disappearing poem and for the dream that broke linear time
and that's where we're going to be going with all of this and I'd like to be proposing that the
concept of infamy energy in this implicate order that the movements that are set up through it
there are harmonics that are running through it I believe the vibrations extend into uh sort of a
harmonic um hole um and but it gets diversity is inherent to the way these tri-creature connect
together we'll be looking at that a little bit more um and because there is diversity within
this implicate order there is information one part informs the other of the movements that are going
on within this implicate order and that emerges into our experience of life we're connected into it
but we try to make sense of it in our explicate order but our brains unfortunately have a weak spot
and that what is relatedness at the level of the implicate order and change of relatedness
in unusual patterns there our brains convert into the idea of solid objects so of course
my motorbike existed of course the car existed of course the poem existed it was a solid object
wasn't it but actually what might be happening in the implicate order at that level is that there
were much more pervasive dynamics on move which we could not be aware of because we were insensitive
to them and that's the relationship between the implicates and the explicate uh that we is part of
life so the ecological systemic view of the social person is in the explicate order and an
informational view of energy and matter is in the implicate order now just coming back to this
sculpture of the three women um this is a conversation about the three people can you see the expressions
on their faces they each have different angles on this conversation one blade is pouring out
a heart about the story the one on the right is taking it all in and just absorb with it
I don't know about you but the one in the middle looks to me just a little bit skeptical saying
yeah maybe so maybe so you know but it's a little bit sitting back and you know so they've got three
different minds that are forming different concepts of one dynamic that's going on between them
what I'd like to point out to you I don't know whether you've noticed it yourself
but have a look at their bodies and their legs they're touching a lot of contact going on between
them there's a lot of very subtle communication going on between them at a different level to
what's going on in their minds yeah that is a picture to me of the implicate order out of which
emerges our own individual perceptions of the explicate order we then converse to try and
team up and make sense and see it from your angle and see it from mine and we very quickly forget
they were all part of something bigger and we're all connected already in it so this is a picture
three analytical perspectives that people can construct on a single dynamic amongst them all
and that these analytic perspectives like the one in the middle can make somebody take a mental
step back from involvement in the conversation just to try and analyze hey what's going on here
if you do I really believe this you know rather than being absorbed in it as the two ladies on
the outside are absorbed in the exchange of information between them so to me this is a
lovely picture of conversations now I'm going to say just a little bit more about the the actual
event of the dream so I mentioned before that there was pulling up some traffic lights I didn't
say that but three cars were stopped and the traffic lights were red but then as I approached
from behind they changed the red amber which in England means hey get ready we're going to be
going soon and on a motorbike that's an absolute gift you just you know accelerate away overtake
all three cars at the same time and zoom on ahead of the lot saying hey this is you know great life
and so but actually alerted by the dream I was just about to start accelerating and I know I stood
on that brake and pulled back behind the last car and then that front car did a spin in the road
roared off in the opposite direction and what I didn't say before is that the car had black
tinted windows it was covered in dust it just looked nasty it wasn't a standard make of car it
had been worked on it looked dangerous and it looked evil there was intentional movement about it
that's the key term there was intentional movement and it was evil now that's what I've reflected on
for years and years and years and this I would like to say is very significant in why I moved from
exploring wider spiritualities to feeling really comfortable with a Celtic approach to
Christianity not to the other formalized religions which I believe have pushed things off to an extreme
but this earthed area of hospitality of community of relatedness now that's where the true spirituality
lies but the point about that encounter on the road right was that there were two personalities there
and the movements the action that happened arose out of our personal values my value was to take
note of that dream my value was to enhance life my values to explore what was going on
I don't know exactly what the values were the driver of that car had but they were not life
enhancing there was there was it was something that I would say is an attitude of deafness
about it and I think this is what convinced me that when we're looking at the implicate order
and relatedness that goes beyond space and time as our explicate order brains construct
and can emerge as a dream one month in advance of that that alerts me in two stages of the dream
to the fact that something dangerous is going to happen in that implicate order
there are human values there the human values are embedded and this is the point I really want to be
making to you that I'm not convinced that the best way of thinking about this implicate order
is to try and call it consciousness or order the I think once we understand that human values
are based in our hearts and move direct our movements direct our thoughts direct the quality
of our relationships and our reactions to each other we're beginning to get ourselves
earthed in the implicate order not the explicate order that's pre-orientation
and our hearts a month before that were somehow discerning something that there's a direction
that my life was going in and this event could have ruined it and whoever was driving that car
was sensitive to the opposite move so I have to say that this this sense of personal value
in the implicate order brings a life for me the conversational nature of reality
and we can we hide it we lose it because of the way our brains orientate us in an explicate order
of matter and substance so hollow movement is the emerging as systemic personal identity
with it now I just to say I'm very fortunate that John Hunt publishers have recently agreed to
publish a book on this subject so what I'm going to be going into explain how I believe space and
time can be conceived in a new way coming out of this implicate order is much explained in much
more detail in this book the title is clearing away unveiling the mental tricks that hide reality
now I'm going to be giving you a very quick overview of what's in that book but really there
would be too much information here for you to try and take it in and really work on it so I'm
going to ask you just to sit back and take it a little bit like going to the cinema where you're
just sort of watching the story unfold and then maybe at the end of it you try and tie it all
together and be critical do I mean this is this is as I say it's hypothesis it's exploring what
could be now I've got a colour coding in the next set of slides that are coming up the black
headings are when I'm talking about tri-critical cosmology itself into the diversifying unity of
life that we're part of that dynamic the red headings are about the concept of time and there
are three perspectives like those three women three perspectives can be struck constructed on
timing the on time that construct an idea of timing the blue headings go into the idea of
space and substance as tri-critical hollow movement so that's the structure of what's coming up
and it's all about synergy as conversational orientation when we enter into this communications
feedback at whatever level we want to consider things synergic life starts to move within us
so there is too much for you to take on board here so I really ask you not to try and take it on too
much but the point is that here I've shown the standard tri-critra of you know of what's how the
brain gets organised and here it is in this analytical direction when somebody takes a mental
step back from the conversation to think about the forms and objects something strange happens
inside the brain the way things are orientated and I go into this in much greater detail in
the book to explain how it all happens in neurological terms as well for those who are
interested but space and time become projected out of the observer identity people become an
observer of life when they look at the forms and objects and the forms and objects take out with
them the space and time leaving inside this sense of personal identity my thought experience
and so an observer of life considers themselves to be a presence of mind I am a presence of mind
observing reality and I retain within me how I change my relatedness to that external reality
which is the origin of the empirical frame of mind the scientific empiricism I can act on this
objective world in any way I choose to without any sense of moral obligation as being part of it
because I'm acting on it now part of what comes with this is that the time frame here is an arrow
of time as I previously said a linear cause effect sequence of causality things move from
the past to the future in the arrow of time and so eternity in this view seems like an endless
string of pictures like an old cinema reel and the present moment is one of these pictures in the
middle and it's slowly moving along this line and spatial dimensions become the real context for life
not a product of life so this is turned inside out what is really the conversational experience
that the movement of relatedness generates space and time and a sense of reality but when you take
an analytical step back from the conversation it looks as if I'm in a boat
are you hearing what I'm hearing it's a very pleasant music in the background
um so um so so that's the one particular analytical perspective and have worked
linear time time sequence becomes formed this is what I call the structuralist perspective
when pushed to an extreme it's the materialist perspective this becomes material but it doesn't
have to be pushed to that extreme but the structuralist perspective will tend to say that the dimensions
of space and time are part of the objective reality now if you take a mental step back to
look at the conversation looking at the changes that are going on there the changes can be
projected out is to my perceived reality and that becomes like a whole chaos of processes
and living souls are making different choices and I really don't know what's going on but in
here the human identity the personal identity becomes my own space my personal bubble in my
personal space I create information that I can push out into this chaos to bring order
and this what I'm calling an informationist view of life and in the last 50 years with
information technology this has become like the dominant way of looking at the world
that information is more important than matter but it can be pushed to an extreme where the
information is given an objectivity which it doesn't belong the information if you see it as a
verb is a dynamic that's going on between two things so people in this view believe they have
to construct information as a noun that they transmit into the chaos to all to the movement
that's going on there now in this one time seems like a time frame it's the story what's the
you could go have a beginning and a middle and an end and I put stuff in that changes the story
or makes the story and so that's a totally different way but it is still measurable just like
linear time is measurable but these are actually different features in terms of the way the brain
can construct a sense of time not spending too long on this now but the third view if one takes
a mental step back from a conversation to start looking at the qualities of relatedness that are
going on in this conversation something totally different happens in the brain and if relatedness
in an extreme can get pushed out to become an objective reality itself as a life force a vitalist
force a spirit a town and that the common thing about all concepts of life forces from any
culture around the world is that they all course through space and they are like a higher power
they are in a presence of a higher power to which individual people feel they must submit
in order to come into a harmony with it for their health and their longevity or or whatever now
what I want to say here is that what is retained in the sense of personal identity looking on this
is that I become a participator in a life that is beyond me yeah and there's a lot in this this is
a vitally important analytical perspective and I need to say very clearly at this point by identifying
these three perspectives I'm not saying any of them is right or wrong they are all equally
justifiable in logical terms but the difficulty is if they get pushed to an extreme extreme
there are logical deductions that don't compare are not compatible with each other and the one
here is that because the personal identity has changed of form retained as part of its identity
this is this concept of my own time and I can return to eternity and come back again in a changed
form and this is logically consistent with this particular view on life this perspective on life
so reincarnation is logical in this perspective but in the materialist perspective it's totally
illogical and in the individualist perspective the informationist it's an interesting idea but
it's neither here nor there whether whether it happens or not so these perspectives give very
different pictures of what's going on in life and I'm going to say this again in any one of
these analytical perspectives you can get a view into the whole of life and see the whole of life
in that perspective and make sense of it as far as it'll go but as soon as you try to integrate it
with the way that it looks from another perspective you're going into problems and people then
sadly end up criticizing each other and blaming each other and and running each other down saying
you're wrong rather than you've got an interesting perspective can we compare those and see if we
can match them to find common ground and that is what this tri-cletal model is all about it's about
being able to recognize the different analytical perspectives but then to bring them together
to explore how to integrate them into a way that we can delve into the implicate order of life
to understand it better to really connect better into it so I want to emphasize I'm not saying that
any one of these is wrong they're all equally justifiable but they each can only be right
as far as they go they can't be the whole truth without trying to match metric with the other
match it with the others and here we sit on the red heading and I just like to for a moment ask
you to think back again to that incident with the driver in the car and myself on the motorbike
just think about the dream and the event I just described three different approaches to time
one is the eternal now throughout life and that we can move from eternity into the now
and and get a very big picture of who I am in the whole picture the other is of time frames
there's a story going on here how extensive is that time frame how extensive is the story
and then there's time sequence was there a time sequence yes there certainly was
there were time sequences going on through that story all three of them are relevant as we reflect
on that unusual event so a triquet for relational balance can avoid dualisms because all those
three perspectives construct a sort of dualism and avoiding dualisms can be found by reflecting
in what I call a gap in time between the seconds of your mind we're now connecting with that poem
between the seconds of the mind there is beauty such as always found
it in the world it can be beautiful but also personal values can create chaos or turmoil
that can actually create danger difficulty and the implicated order is basically a life enhancing
order that generates life and can bring healing and restoration even when people's values
cause destruction and brokenness
so this is the last slide on time and timing so we talked about three different perspectives
the timing of decisions some of you may know the zen art and arrow paradox that the art and the
arrow are all one concept if you now think about the three analyses this is how we get into
interaction the aiming of that why is somebody tensioning if they have a purpose in mind the
tension is both in the person and in the bow the release of that arrow is a decision in linear time
that the time is right there's a story about the whole context in which this action is being
tensioned and aligned this is Karen Barad's interaction and in this tri-creatural concept
of movement if you're in a what's called a positivist view that there are little bits of
battle like atoms and so on that actually has their own reality that's the positive view of
the world people talk about well what sets these things in movement and this movement of what these
bits exist but what brings the movement but on a tri-creatural cosmology is turning that upside
down and saying that what the things matter emerges out of movement it's emergent order
from implicated order and this is process philosophy it's the emergence and dispersal
of pattern forms among infamenity movement reshaping and releasing continuously as that
archer and arrow is doing which means that when we start looking at quantum
quantum physics or mechanics or whatever you want to call it we're not looking at quantum
a quantum of energy as if energy is something that is pre-existent we're looking at quantum
change a small package of change right which can scale up by further entanglements to create
movement out of which particles and waves emerge and the whole explicated order eventually
emerges in which we are intraactive so there's a few slides now looking at what is the concept of
space and of substance into which this movement is in which we're in which we're part of the
movement now the tri-creature actually has two forms the knot theory shows that it has a left
spin in the right spin clockwise or anti-clockwise and here you can see the one here this line comes
down in front of that one and here it comes down behind it this is knot theory and they have different
dynamics they're each equal in terms of movement but there's a different structure to us so
just moving on there when they pair up this is again the core icon is a double tri-creature
this is where a single tri-creature actually gains existence a single quantum change has no
existence on its own but when that change starts to communicate with another in a conversational
reality it becomes a vibration one becomes an ecology for the other this is the core element
of existence now when i started making 3d printed models of these i discovered the most remarkable
thing that the left and the levone dextro l and d resonant quanta when they when diverse quanta
quanta fit together the four ligands that remain on the outside of it lie in a horizontal two
dimensional plane but if you get an ll and a dd so this this here is an l form that one is going
behind that one and that one is an l form that one's going behind that one so this is ll and
this one the ligand has to twist in order to allow bi-directional informational flow which means
that the four ligands that come off from it orientate in different directions and here
i'm going to make the bold claim we are seeing the origin of the three dimensions of space
it is the movement of these entanglements that has to twist in order to preserve a harmonic
vibration if that could not twist there would be no harmonic it would stop vibrating each
triquid will change would separate and break up and disperse process philosophy but as it is
when there is harmonic it becomes some this core of existence now in quantum computing
they need three core states called plus minus and zero and i would without going into this i'd
like to propose that these three core double tri-quitra are probably what these core quantum
states are called qubits and qubits of information so i actually call them informational qubits to
try and emphasize that its movement and not a substance and not an object in itself
their synergic resonant movements vibrations at the plank length that really small length of
quantum change now here we are not going to spend long on this but when these scale up
further and entangle into long strings we end up with three different types of wave you can
you see the side ligands from this all of these are blue i'm really have no time to explain this
but the book will in greater detail all i can say is that these waves can develop a fourth dimension
movement along the way backwards and forwards like a slinky going a long way and that fourth
dimension movement can add time into the three dimensions of space and in fact there can be
lots more spins and twists and curls and so on of these sort of things which add extra dimensions
of movement and i would like to be proposing to you that the various dimensions of m theory and
string theory are actually different types of movement at different scales scaling up
in a spin foam of these waves that are connecting with each other i'm not going to go into the
details here but when you get the ld diverse stable qubits they make a horizontal flat plane
and it turns into a hexagon i've made models of these a flat hexagon and these waves of gravity
and light and heat are running through this as a standing wave rather than progressing from it
i'm going to have to move on but here this picture shows how you can get a progressive wave of any
sort and stable domains can come off the edge of it and i'd like to propose to you that these
stable domains as i call them are the seeds of particles we'll go on to the next slide to see
that but a single stable domain can have several different waves coming off it and the waves can
crisscross with each other making a spin foam and all of this is movement all of this is movement
informational movement making a spin foam of the implicate order out of which one area becomes
diverse from another so you get informational transfer between them but one area knows what's
going on somewhere else in a synergic network informational quantum movement because of the
utter interrelated interrelatedness of implicate order behind patterned matter that is in constant
change it's the bidirectionality of movement now the single hexagon can extend into a high cone
of stable domains all mixing together and the standing waves of heat and light and gravity
can move through this this is the closest picture that i can get to of the implicate order but it
gets more complex than this now imagine that this is a flat thing i've made a model of this
but this extended stable domain there's absolutely no reason why it shouldn't curl topologically
in on itself in which case you can get these waves that might span internally
within that topological pattern and those become the internal forces of a particle
or whatever scale of particle you want to come to so those waves those three basic
preqiful waves can either become progressive waves spanning the whole cosmos in terms of
light waves and gravity or they can become the internal strong forces and weak forces that
make particles and matter hold together but then also if these stable domain extended stable domains
are curling around to make particles some of them will be very stable and some could be unstable
and that is what i believe are particles are emerging out of this implicate order
and scaling up into atoms scaling up into molecules scaling up into macromolecules
which form into cell membranes and these components of cells which form the microtubules
which help to move the amoeba to move through the environment and respond to its environment
more widely which which help mitochondria bacteria to find a home inside cells and generate energy
that all of this is going on in a cell which scales up into a higher order organism
which tend to relate and they breed and create more and create families that communicate
all around identical principles of movement movement is the changing relatedness of
patterned forms at every level emergent from the implicate order
now in current quantum theory i don't think there's any theory around that actually adequately
explains how gravity and light can interact but this particular model shows that this is
quite a complicated one to understand but i ran pipe cleaners through this this model of two
waves interacting the orange one is a gravitational wave the green one is a light wave and both of
them share a relatedness ligand now this looks as if one wave is passing through another but
that's the wrong picture of the implicate order the implicate order is a harmonic it's a spin
from network in which the there's or i would actually claim synchronicity between two ends
of a wave what becomes linear time is the movement of the fourth dimensional wave along these
tri-critical waves as i call them the tri-critical waves are forming a spin from network the implicate
order and through that implicate order can move linear waves and those are what science measures
science can compare one fourth dimension wave with another but it has no way of delving into
the true nature of the implicate order we can only discern this by scaling our human experience of
being together in groups in conversations where there's informational transfer in a brain that
is designed to interpret it using these three principles that's what i'm proposing so this
is an informational model of movement in quantum gravity it's happening in every cell in every
cell membrane of your body including every nerve cell every synapse in your brain is moving according
to these principles the microtubules also move brain neurotransmitters to the synapse and release
them at the synapse it's the same chemistry that moves an amoeba and that is moving atoms and
molecules that are on movement everywhere above absolute zero is in movement so this universe
is a cosmos because it births life in its diverse ecologies and we belong in this concept of ecology
with others we are not here on our own the the conversational nature of life is something that
we really need to to appreciate that when you look at an object you are seeing a brain construct
of changing relatedness a whole history of changing relatedness that we're interpreting as an object
so we can talk about it and manipulate it but actually it's evidence of the fact that we belong
in this cosmos we're in it we're interactive within it try to reach for quantum cosmology
the inner human heart is deeply synergic with life's movements and a much wider
concept than our explicate all the brains can take in the conscious mental experience of
orientation adds dimensional space and time right but we have a meaningful engagement
with relational life beyond space and time that's the input order in our inner hearts
in from energy is life moving in the background that we connect into and we try to make sense of
it like those three women in the conversation try to make sense of it from our different
perspectives but there is life on the go and and we we need the conversations to try and
really grasp what is actually going on now the final thing before I just close is that that
image that I gave you of the intricate order I haven't gone into this the book will go into
this in much greater detail so to properly explain it but imagine a group of people imagine that
those three women talking but imagine you're in a group of people having a conversation about
the day's events or planning where you want to go on holiday and so on and the exchanges that
are going on between you there's a whole raft of communications at an implicates a pre-orientation
level below the orientation horizons hold all those communications are going on passing
things back and forth about our values we then construct this impression or try to make sense
of what's going on now I'm not going to spend long on gravitational waves gravity holds together
at diverse places of the universe there's an enduring connection between every mass in the
universe now that to me is in the human experience could emerge as the equivalent of love love is
enduring connection between people an enduring ability to be responsive to each other even
though there might be fairly traumatic changes going on or fairly disturbing changes or maybe
anticipating very pleasant changes but that enduring sense of connection could be an equivalent
of gravitational attraction the warmth the thermodynamics of responsiveness the warmth
could be the equivalent of human kindness that as we respond to each other we're going with you know
as we're in this group together we maybe discern our differences but there can still be a warmth
of responsiveness of kindness that says well I can respond to you and you know keep this connection
worn alive but also the there is the sense of presence we can be present for each other or
you know when somebody's distracted and isn't really involved in the conversation you know it
and people sometimes take themselves away they hide themselves away they don't allow themselves
to be a presence in a social network and this is rather equivalent to the electromagnetic
type waves where where the electromagnetic magnetism causes two polarities I haven't been
able to go into that at all I'm afraid in this talk but the D and the L waves can run through
this network parallel to each other and will have opposite effects so you can have attraction or
repulsion between positive and negative charges and magnetism north and south poles and so on
but why why should all that matter be dualistic separated from our hearts from our inner hearts
we're embedded in it we're intuiting it we're communicating about it we're trying to understand
it by talking with people who see it differently and trying to edge towards a better understanding
of it and we need to be the presence of loving kindness for each other and that is a substantial
reality of a human being in this world that is the core substantial reality of a human being in
this world to be the presence of loving kindness for others in social settings or with the earth or
with god or whatever the spirituality is that is alive for you at that time and of course the love
unfortunately does not always feel like that comfortable warm cuddly joy of love when things
are going together love also is made known as grief where there's brokenness where there's separation
where there's misunderstanding or doubt or there's been offense taken or hurt that love turns into
a grief mode which you know we teach about in other areas that it actually has a positive purpose
a constructive purpose to help people to explore how to reconnect into that enduring connection
when change has pushed people out of a comfort zone but nevertheless that that grief can move
people to explore and if we have the warmth of kindness and we recognize someone is grieving
and we can be present for them then we can contribute to the healing of this world the
explicate order can get tied up in knots and we can help to untangle that we can be the presence
of loving kindness and we will be connecting into this implicated order discerning intuitively what
the movements of that order are what the values are that we need to bring alive in our relationships
now so this is the conclusion of what the the the triquetral cosmology brings us to a concept
that the human heart is much more formative of our lives than our conscious minds which we need
to connect with others in conversations in order to discern and delve deeper into what's happening
in our human hearts in terms of values and interactions so I'll just come back to that
original slide the iconic slide of triquetral cosmology two self-organizing units that are
in communication with each other there is a mutual transformation that is synergic that is
life emerging and that synergy can we become an ecology for each other and that can bring
forth fruitfulness in life after that so this I believe I'm going to come back now to the final
slide is the implicated order within which mysterious things can happen things beyond
space and time things in which substance disappears but I'd like to say to you that that
inspiration that I had to write that poem and just think this is now 50 years ago
angle's turn and lines forgive criss-crossing of the mind I hadn't even didn't know about
triquetra but I wrote that angle's turn and lines forgive criss-crossing of the mind for here
in the world there is beauty such as always found between the seconds of your mind
so thank you that's what I'd like to be sharing with you very much indeed
Trevor that was fascinating and and I think it'll take us a little bit of time to get our heads
around your new concepts but I find them very very beautiful and especially as they relate to
to David Bohm and I just a couple of remarks before you know we have a five-minute break
and then we'll come back to the question announcements and questions and one form of pattern
recognition that I would associate with David Bohm would be meaning and and maybe we can come back
to that in the in the thought because he was meaning and being he talked about
and he he didn't like the mind matter idea he he he put everything into into into a different form
so that was one observation and the second the other two observations related to Ian the Gilchrist
because I think the brain that makes matter in substance is affected by left hemisphere left
hemisphere cognition and the right hemisphere is what enables us to understand betweenness
yes betweenness is is crucial to your model it's also crucial to his and I'd just like you to tell
us I'll clarify for us how exactly you would define the inner human heart I didn't quite get that
clear use the term a lot yes is it in is it the intuition is it the what what is it exactly
do you have a definition for it well I I think it is going to need clarification in a fairly
extended way but the one way is to distinguish what in our human experience is not actually
orientated in space and time so below the orientation horizon if you think how much
for you imagine you are embedded in this explicate order world right around you that's above the
orientation horizon but there's a lot of experience to do with intuition sensing
that is is not framed in that way yeah it's very subtle it's very subtle yeah it's
nuanced it's dynamic and it's movement and and it is exactly as David Bohm is saying it's about
meaning it's I'm aware that there's some dynamic going on inside me but I cannot believe that I am
isolated in this this world this cosmos right what is this mentor of connection where do I belong
in it because what I see with my senses what is constructed into the simplified order
is not the whole story you know Ian's perspective as well that you have to think that we emerge from
within something and we're not apart from it absolutely and that's that in his whole his whole
chapter on the sense of the sacred you know makes this point anyway I'm we're going to have a break
now so back at 50 and then we'll have some brief announcements and then I'm sure there'll be a lot
questions thank you
um I think what popped in my mind when when I was reading a lot of you know the what if
questions it certainly is true that I believe the explicate order that our brains construct
everybody knows about the blind spot you know how our brain sort of fills in consciously
where there is no sensory input to the retina and we have all sorts of anticipations in life
that make us focus our attention in various ways and screen out other things and that's more the way
I look on this informational processing is because of our focus of attention we screen certain things
out and I believe that the whole brain works on feedback loops and we can we end up a little bit
like that film the matrix you know making our own reality in a way so so that's what those three
analytical perspectives are that the more you push yourself down that line of maintaining your focus
on certain areas of life the more you become separated from the ongoing in implicate order
conversational reality yeah you go off into your own mental world and you can talk with talk
with like-minded people and it'll sound as if everything's sensible and you're seeing it all
together but there will always be a limit to that one perspective just as a Galileo project
has said there's a definite limit to materialism but what what can we explore alternatively
that's the same is true if you if you if you take the vitalist view to an extreme
I'm afraid to say while I am a great believer in that participatory view of life
I'm I'm you know I don't believe I can just think it all into existence I'm not sure that
you know I think there is a material reality out there that that implicate order actually is
making particles and waves and the particles scale up into things that do behave deterministically
now we can work with that at different levels but the idea that just with our conscious minds
we can sort of dissolve it I just feel that's maybe going to a step too far there's sort of a
middle ground of paradox that we need to be living in where we're that's why we need the
conversations to explore that middle ground very good I mean what what you're saying also
we're doing a Bergson because the Bergson said the brain is the organ of attention to life
and and part of part of that attention is exclusion yes and if we if we took in all the
information that that we potentially could we'd be completely overloaded and we're already overloaded
and but we'd be completely swamped absolutely absolutely and and thank you
so what I'd like to do if I could just sort of build on this point a bit more I've said the
brain works on feedback loops now I personally believe that and you're asking for my concept
within a human heart I think many people are aware that decisions choices are made emotionally
yeah they're made through the limbic brain and the core brain which is pulling together all
sorts of associations and sales psychology of course is expert at this they know how to influence
the emotions to influence the government right yes thank you and and so decisions are formed by
feedback loops between the core brain and the limbic brain and the cerebral cortex but also
coming into the core brain is all of our sensory input and there are filters in the core brain
that filter the sensory input on its way up and the outgoing motor in outputs
feed those filters they put a priority and that's part of the attention-focusing mechanism
yeah which of course a neuro neuro linguistic program is very strong on all of that sort of
filtering of information now that's what I believe the values are they're actually the priming of
filters in the core brain and the limbic brain that allow through certain things that we're
anticipating or magnify things that don't fit with it mismatches so that our attention focuses
on what is not going right so we can target our activity towards that purpose the purpose that
we have in mind the problem is the purpose we have in mind is our purpose not the bigger
purpose of the universe yes well there may be some sort of alignment there but we can't tell
yeah absolutely let's move on to the next question it's Julie Henshelwood does the
implicate order imply potential this is 2105 that's your question I think an absolutely
core thing that's going on for me is that discover all the the the Nobel Prize in 2011
which they had proved that the universe is still expanding at an ever-increasing rate
the universe is an open system and again in the book I would go into how I believe the open the
the tri-critical model allows the open generation of of new areas new new substance even you know
that my experience of life and I have had these personal experiences is that substance can
transform miraculously I simply have to say that is my experience that does not fit with
the laws of science and the laws of thermodynamics and so there is something about open system
thinking which as Julie is saying is all about growth and opportunity and potential
and the potential can grow but through conversational interaction it can stabilize
those stable domains are absolutely the core of what makes life sustainable right so there's a
constant movement but and those stable domains can form and they can disrupt and they can split
but nevertheless the fact that they stabilize movement and change and that that can scale up
to a level of predictability and determinism you know also allows because it's rooted in movement
it allows the miraculous and unusual transformation of those stability I think that's the key point
really and when I said we're David Bohm you're starting from the dynamic hollow movement and I
was just bowled over when I read The Implicit Order in about 1983 he spoke at the Mystics and
Scientists conference that year in fact with the Sheldrake and I'm also thinking that the closed
system is associated with linear thinking and a linear idea of time so I think this is as it
were systemic if I'm understanding you properly because once you've got an open system you're also
open into well we are consciousnesses there is our access means for the whole of what we're talking
about and but but once you're open you're open outwards and inwards if one can even make that
distinction I'm just totally with that but it all depends on our sensitivities and our willingness
to create gaps in time so that we can just step back from all of our constructs and just engage
with new sensitivities but then we need to affirm that through conversations with others who see
life differently because otherwise we just go off into our own you know our own imaginary worlds
if we do that we need this conversational interaction to find our own stabilities
then we are coming on to Peter from Scotland where it's still light it's totally sharp
yes indeed it's light but I'd like some light cast on my problems I might
I'm going to I can't formulate it properly for you so I ask you to be very tolerant of what I'm
saying because I haven't come to the a full understanding of what we're doing a number of us
in Bacillus is one of them are looking at random number generators and we're looking at the way
they go out of randomness now what is interesting about this is that we're looking at it what happens
when people die and we have reason to think that this will be a point at which the random numbers
will go out of randomness and also and this is much more interesting much more important
is that you link random number generators to specific people and specific events by forming
a relationship with them and the event so that's three three events there's a generator
there's the event and there is you who is doing it and it seems to me that there is going to
as time moves on the relationship between the random number generators and people and events
are going to increase enormously you'll have one in your pocket and you will to some extent see
the intensity of what somebody is thinking also time is a material and space is a material
now with that rather poorly formulated question can you can you help
um I'm really not sure what a random number generator physically is it's a presumably a
mini computer correct and what is the actual product you know what and what form does the
number remember so my model about whole movement at the input order is that it's the changing
relatedness of formed patterns but the formed patterns um it are of movement there there are
cyclical synergic you know spins or vibrations or progressions of energy
through this spin foam so what does the now random number generator do it produces streams of
noughts and ones and noughts and ones and these are either totally random as the pattern you get
or in fact they're less random they have structure in them and the structure it seems to be given
a remotely uh and there is a space is is not counted and uh um okay the thing the thing so
as you were telling you know your story describing the situation what popped into my mind
was the time when I was using the Qing and thinking about divination and there are the
settings and religious settings in which people try to divine um what is the dynamic that's going
on in hollow movement uh or in the implicate order uh and I came to think that there really
there's no need to use sticks and stones to do that um you know if our hearts are open to a
relationship with the implicate order we should be able to increase our sensitivities enough to be
able to discern intuitively you know wise courses of action now I'm just wondering whether you're
describing the opposite you know which is that if I have made a relationship with uh an electronic
random number generator right that that relationship uh with it actually brings my heart level values
and here I would say rather my thoughts I'm repeatedly going to come back to my values
we bring my values into a dynamic relationship with whatever the um the quantum level
substance of your random number generator is I can't really be more precise I wonder whether
there's a form there's a form of entangled one going on here yes thank you that's probably a
helpful word there yeah um yes because in other words you you become somehow related
to the dynamics of the system which you aren't initially um but you become so through interacting
yes it's a little bit like the biofeedback system but if you if you have a belief that
this random number generator is something you can have a relationship with then perhaps you can
that I think is an interesting premise because and in fact I think I think I write in saying Peter
the the skeptics trying to do this often have um negative correlations
yes there we go we create our own realities yeah you see that's really interesting okay Peter
thanks so much let's go on to actually before I go on to Bernard that's what I want to ask
this question from Craig Hayengar about um the comparison of your triquetras with trefoil knots
yes and he did a bit about that so maybe you could just say a little bit about that
yes we looked at that the first um computer assisted design um models that we were making
the guy who was doing it uh it assumed that I was talking about a trefoil
and the the mathematics of a trefoil has been extremely well worked out they know all the
formula of the different curves um obvious and so he thought oh this is simple we just
string trefoils together and it just didn't work at all but the reason being that a trefoil
the what is a point on a triquetra is an angle that turns internally or becomes a ligand that
extends into the neighboring uh triquetra right it's a movement that either angles in on itself
and reflects internally or it becomes part of a synergy with an entangled one now trefoil that
angle is actually a curve now it's more like a ribbon that called curves around and goes back in
and it definitely is the same sort of eternal movement there's no question of that you know
they're both describing eternal movement but the trefoil doesn't include within it a model by which
it can entangle and we proved that because we tried and failed good okay I think we'll just
leave it at that because we're going to have 10 minutes or so and there's still people in the queue
thank you and it's our president burnard car next right hello bernard hello trevor
trevor thank you i enjoyed your talk very much um but there was quite a lot to take in and i don't
understand all of it so um but and so i was particularly interested of course in in the
emphasis you put on the triquetra and all these beautiful diagrams um i've really of course i'm
aware of triquetra in as a sort of Celtic symbol but i hadn't seen it applied in all these ways
and i really like the way you're applying it in all these different contexts both in
representation of particle physics the representation of the brain a representation of
relationships it's also reminding me a bit of dna and i was wondering why if you could apply it to
life in some sense you know but that's that could be a big question but the the more specific
question was being a physicist because i was particularly interested in what you said in
terms of its relationship to string theory really and quantum gravity and you made references to
spin foam but i couldn't quite work out to what extent you've really worked this out as a physical
theory um and to what extent it's just sort of um a qualitative discussion have you have you had
any feedback from string theorists on this sort of a right no you put your finger on the issue here
because uh remember i'm starting from a neurophysiological angle yeah i'm starting from the
level of human dynamics of systems of people and the way they communicate and how they get into
habits and routines and so on how you can break those habits and i've described in that
principles of organization that's the key term and then realize that those principles scale up
and scale down and of course my studies have taken me scaling down into cellular chemistry
macromolecular chemistry atomic and quantum i am new to everybody's new to it really aren't we
we're all guessing our way through it but what i'm saying my theory but my hypothesis
is that these principles of organization the brain has evolved to engage with so that we can have
consistent social relationships yeah that's the theory that same set of principles can scale
right down into an implicate order with entanglements that is a an order of movement
which comes below the level of any it's itty bitty you know building block you know that
it is the movement this primary that as those entangle because of the sine wave
ligands that form between them it generates the three dimensions of space yeah it actually
generates those but then where you get it stringing out into a long what i call a triquetral wave
just like a slinky you can get a fourth dimension wave moving along it yeah that's the that's so
if the stable domain curls into a particle which is held together by internal waves you can get a
vibration of that particle that's a fifth dimension you can get vibrations between
particles that's a sixth dimension any ligand can spin that's a seventh dimension i don't know
no here i'm guessing so you're absolutely right this is a qualitative model at the moment and my
i set off once i was working on it i set off on a search to find a quantum physicist who
would help me to apply their mathematics to this model to see that if it if it does match
experimental findings uh and so we can then modify it according to experimental findings
and i will simply say over a year's search i have not found a single uh quantum physicist who's
willing to talk to me so maybe about celios we'll talk to you well yeah i'd love to i
i want to search for one but but it needs to you know this is very much angular um angular mechanics
and so on it's the whole lot is curving all the time yeah well of course i'm i'm very fascinated
also with with what you just said about the link with dimensions and indeed the links with
hard dimensions which is one of my own interests i just one one little point you made the beginning
which i sort of disagree with which i'll just say very quickly um when you talked about the link
between open systems and the acceleration of the universe i wasn't really convinced by that because
it is true of course that the universe is accelerating but i mean even if the universe
wasn't accelerating um you still have this concept that you can violate the second or a thermodynamics
because of you know chaos there in things nonlinear effects because you can you can locally form
ever-increasing levels of complexity simply because you're not violating the second law
of thermodynamics globally because you know it's just a small fraction of the universe involved
in these this increasing structure so i wasn't really convinced by that argument in other words
even if the universe hadn't been accelerating i reckon your your argument would still go through
well that's helpful thank you learned because that would fit with the way um i again we're not
going to have time to go into this now but again in the book i do but uh but it's i actually believe
that an extending tri-critical wave moving into nothingness can actually induce movement
in nothingness right can you can actually and we actually could look at the process of continuous
creation uh through that sort of dynamic that's changing never mind the details of that it comes
back down to another couple of zen paradoxes in the way that that all works um but what you're
saying is that yes at any locality yeah at at any locality that same dynamic could be happening
and that is why the universe would be expanding at an ever-increasing rate because it is also
happening in micro-localities yeah that's that's how the expansion is happening at an
increasing rate because it's happening everywhere so i totally in agreement with you that yes that
the the chaos the complexity principles um can scale up in in any locality and the problem is when
mentally we make closed systems and believe we can experiment on it right and that that experiment
tells us the truth it doesn't it tells us what goes on in the closed system that we've created
yes i i think we've we've only got five minutes left um i think that it would be well worth trying
to develop this in in within the context of a working group within the Galileo Commission
and Vasilio you know can be in touch about this because i think there's there's a lot of
very interesting detail um to be worked out here and which really needs a much more extended
conversation than than we're able to have in in this context of some kind of questions and answers
well David thank you very much yes yeah so i mean uh Jerome sent a message to me saying does it need
a um a special interest group but i think it's probably more within the Galileo Commission
and and so i'll put you and Vasilio in touch um to talk about that Bernard thank you very much
indeed yes thank you Bernard uh Trevor thank you very much it's been incredibly rich
even and also from the the questions um a couple of points one i'm i'm put in mind of um
Gregory Bateson pattern that connects oh yes yes i mean his it's always worth going back to
Gregory Bateson because his he has actually incredibly fertile so amazing absolutely and
so i'm sure you will find new new connections there and then the other the other observation is
is a relationship between the implicate and the implicit and and the tacit um um sorry
Sheila we we haven't got time for any further questions um the the as as with David Bohm
the the implicate or the implicit is what's enfolded or tacit and i'm using tacit in the sense of
the microplan use um know the tacit dimension the tacit and the explicit and and so when we
David Bohm talks about this when we explain something we unfold it into the explicate order
because to explain literally means to unfold explicory and and i i i think this whole metaphor
of implicit explicit implicate explicate is extraordinarily fruitful and what you've done
is to multiply its dimensions and put it into a variety of contexts um which i think is extremely
fertile and and uh what i also very much like which is something we all need to do and again
Ian McGilchrist does this in his new book primacy of process primacy of relationship primacy of
betweenness and we got so used to our sort of subject predicate um their distinction our dualistic
in a in a mind matter um that way even our language and logic is structured um so that you've
got subject and predicate and Bohm kept on saying what about the verb yes the verb the
dynamism of the verb is in fact the most important element in a defining relationship between the
subject and the predicate and and rick tarnas is very good on explaining the origins of this it is
book um they they um make the passion the western mind um the background Aristotle and Aristotle
codified Greek logics absolutely fascinating i haven't read it for years but it just sort of
came to mind um so as i say i think let's let's get a group going um within um the Galileo commission
i think you've sent some resources i know there are some people who will very much want to be
in touch with you personally and and uh we'll take it forward from there so thank you very much
again thank you all for coming thank you for the questions uh thank you Jerome for the backup
and all the all that goes on behind the scenes to make these webinars possible and thank you again